.de [
.ig ]
..
.if n .rm }F }H
.TH m5 1 "01 Aug 1999"
.SH NAME
m5, m5.awk \- macro processor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B m5
[
.BI \-D name
] [
.BI \-D name = def
]
.RB [ \-c ]
[
.BI \-dp " char"
] [
.BI \-o " file"
] [
.BI \-sp " char"
] [
.I file ".\|.\|."
]
.LP
[\c
.B g|n\c
]\c
.B awk
.B \-f
.B m5.awk
.B X
[
.BI \-D name
] [
.BI \-D name = def
]
.RB [ \-c ]
[
.BI \-dp " char"
] [
.BI \-o " file"
] [
.BI \-sp " char"
] [
.I file ".\|.\|."
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "m5" "" "\fLm5\fP \(em macro processor"
.IX "macro processor" "m5 command" "" "\(em \fLm5\fP"
.LP
\f3m5\fP is a Bourne shell script for invoking \f3m5.awk\fP,
which actually performs the macro processing.
\f3m5\fP, unlike many macroprocessors,
does not directly interpret its input.
Instead it uses a two-pass approach in which
the first pass translates the input to an awk program,
and the second pass executes the awk program
to produce the final output.
Details of usage are provided below.
.LP
As noted in the synopsis above, its invocation may
require specification of \f3awk\fP, \f3gawk\fP, or \f3nawk\fP, depending
on the version of \f3awk\fP available on your system.
This
choice is further complicated on some systems, e.g. Sun,
which have both \f3awk\fP (original awk) and \f3nawk\fP (new awk).
Other systems appear to have new awk, but have named it
just \f3awk\fP.
New awk should be used, regardless of what
it has been named.
The macro processor translator will
not work using original awk because the former, for
example, uses the built-in function match().
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.TP 14
\f3-D\f2name\fP
Following the \f3cpp\fP convention, define name as 1 (one).
This is the same as if a -Dname=1 appeared as an option
or #name=1 appeared as an input line.
Names specified
using -D are awk variables defined just before main is
invoked.
.TP
\f3-D\f2name=def\fP
Define name as "def".
This is the same as if #name="def"
appeared as an input line. Names specified using -D are
awk variables defined just before main is invoked.
.TP
\f3X\fP
Yes, that really is a capital "X".
The version of \f3nawk\fP
on Sun Solaris 2.5.1 apparently does its own argument
processing before passing the arguments on to the awk
program.
In this case, X (and all succeeding options)
are believed by \f3nawk\fP to be file names and are passed on
to the macro processor translator (\f3m5.awk\fP) for its own
argument processing).
Without the X, Sun \f3nawk\fP attempts
to process succeeding options (e.g., -Dname) as valid \f3nawk\fP
arguments or files, thus causing an error.
This may not
be a problem for all \f3awk\fPs.
.TP
\f3-c\fP
Compile only.
The output program is still produced, but
the final output is not.
.TP
\f3-dp\f2 char\fP
The directive prefix character (default is #).
.TP
\f3-o\f2 file\fP
The output program file (default is a.awk).
.TP
\f3-sp\f2 char\fP
The substitution prefix character (default is $).
.so 77_usage.t
.so 77_example.t
.SH FILE
.PD 0
.TP 14
.B a.awk
default output program file
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR awk (1),
.BR cpp (1),
.BR gawk (1),
.BR m4 (1),
.BR nawk (1).
.BR vi (1)
.SH AUTHOR
William A. Ward, Jr.,
School of Computer and Information Sciences,
University of South Alabama,
Mobile, Alabama,
July 23, 1999.
